Task: 
Part2: LLVM IR Builder
Due Feb 26 by 11:59pm Points 20 Submitting a website url
Important links:

1. IR Builder useful functions

2. IR Builder testsDownload IR Builder tests

3. Algorithm for building LLVM IR from AST (Your algorithm is worth 5 points. Submit the algorithm under the Part2 LLVM IR builder algorithm assignment. I will release my algorithm on Feb 20th.

Input: AST root node

Output: LLVM module reference

There are two parts to the algorithm:

Part 1 is a preprocessor that renames variables in the AST such that they have a unique name and replaces the old name with the new name in all uses of any renamed variables. This part also creates a map that uses the variable's name as a key and a reference to the corresponding alloc instruction (LLVMValueRef). The alloc instructions will be generated by the IR builder, as described below.
IR Builder: This part creates the LLVM IR (LLVM module) by performing a tree traversal (similar to the one you used in semantic analysis in Part1). Here are some tips to help you write the algorithm:
In the first basic block of the function, create an alloc instruction for every local variable, parameter, and return value of the function. For variables and parameters, store the references to alloc statements in a map. You may keep the reference to the alloc instruction of the return value handy as a global variable or store it in the map.
Create a special return basic block for the function that contains: a load instruction from the alloc instruction of the return value, and a LLVM return instruction. For every return statement you see during the AST traversal, create a store instruction to write the return value into the memory assigned (pointed by the alloc instruction for the return value) and branch to the return basic block. 
For if or if-else statements, create an entry basic block that checks the condition of the if statement and an exit basic block that is the destination of branch instructions in the body of if and else statements. 
 For a while statement, create a basic block that checks the condition of the while loop. This basic block will be the exit point for the body of the while loop. 


Links: 
IR Builder useful functions
Creating a module: LLVMModuleCreateWithName

Setting the final architecture target (use "x86_64-pc-linux-gnu" for target triple): LLVMSetTarget(LLVMModuleRef M, const char *Triple) 
Creating the function type (LLVMTypeRef *ParamTypes is a set of parameter types, see create_ir class example for details): LLVMTypeRef LLVMFunctionType(LLVMTypeRef ReturnType, LLVMTypeRef *ParamTypes, unsigned ParamCount, LLVMBool IsVarArg)

Adding function to a module: LLVMAddFunction(LLVMModuleRef M, const char *Name, LLVMTypeRef FunctionTy)
Adding a basic block to a function: LLVMAppendBasicBlock(LLVMValueRef Fn, const char *Name)  
This group of functions are for adding instructions to each basic block. The most important is for creating a builder.  A builder is responsible for placing the instruction at the correct location in a basic block. 
Creating a builder: LLVMCreateBuilder
Setting the location of a builder: 
LLVMPositionBuilderAtEnd(LLVMBuilderRef Builder, LLVMBasicBlockRef Block);

LLVMPositionBuilderBefore(LLVMBuilderRef Builder, LLVMValueRef Instr)

LLVMPositionBuilder(LLVMBuilderRef Builder, LLVMBasicBlockRef Block, LLVMValueRef Instr)

LLVMGetInsertBlock(LLVMBuilderRef Builder) 

 LLVMClearInsertionPosition(LLVMBuilderRef Builder)

LLVMInsertIntoBuilder(LLVMBuilderRef Builder, LLVMValueRef Instr)

Once done creating your LLVM IR, dispose of the builder: LLVMDisposeBuilder(LLVMBuilderRef Builder) 
Function to create different types of instructions: 
Terminator instructions:
Unconditional branch: LLVMBuildBr(LLVMBuilderRef, LLVMBasicBlockRef Dest)
Conditional branch: LLVMBuildCondBr(LLVMBuilderRef, LLVMValueRef If,  LLVMBasicBlockRef Then, LLVMBasicBlockRef Else)
Return statement: LLVMBuildRet(LLVMBuilderRef, LLVMValueRef  V)
Arithmetic and comparison instructions:
Integer comparison: LLVMBuildICmp(LLVMBuilderRef, LLVMIntPredicate Op, LLVMValueRef LHS, LLVMValueRef RHS, const char *Name)
Integer addition: LLVMBuildAdd(LLVMBuilderRef, LLVMValueRef LHS, LLVMValueRef RHS, const char *Name)
Integer subtraction: LLVMBuildSub(LLVMBuilderRef, LLVMValueRef LHS, LLVMValueRef RHS, const char *Name) 
Integer multiplication: LLVMBuildMul(LLVMBuilderRef, LLVMValueRef LHS, LLVMValueRef RHS, const char *Name)
Integer division (we always use signed division): LLVMBuildSDiv(LLVMBuilderRef, LLVMValueRef LHS, LLVMValueRef RHS, const char *Name)
Call instruction: LLVMBuildCall2(LLVMBuilderRef, LLVMTypeRef, LLVMValueRef Fn, LLVMValueRef *Args, unsigned NumArgs, const char *Name)                            
Load and store instructions:
Create a load instruction: LLVMBuildLoad2(LLVMBuilderRef, LLVMTypeRef Ty, LLVMValueRef PointerVal, const char *Name)
Create a store instruction: LLVMBuildStore(LLVMBuilderRef, LLVMValueRef Val, LLVMValueRef Ptr)
Alloc instructions:
Create alloc instructions: LLVMBuildAlloca(LLVMBuilderRef, LLVMTypeRef Ty, const char *Name)
Set the memory alignment: LLVMSetAlignment(LLVMValueRef V, unsigned Bytes)

3. Algorithms
IR Builder Algorithm
Input: AST root node

Output: LLVM Module representing the program

Assumption: All variables in the AST have been renamed to have unique names

Data structures:

var_map: A map from variable name to alloc instruction (need to be reset for every function
Algorithm:

Start at the root (prog node):
Generate a module, set the target architecture
Generate LLVM functions without bodies for print and read extern function declarations
Visit the function node
Do the following for the function node:
Generate a LLVM builder.
Generate an entry basic block, and let entryBB be the reference to this basic block
Create a set with names of all parameters and local variables (strongly recommend using C++ strings for names).
Set the position of the builder to the end of entryBB
Initialize var_map to a new map: 
For each name in the set created above: 
Generate an alloc statement 
Add name, LLVMvalueRef of alloc statement generated above to var_map  
Generate an alloc instruction for the return value and keep the LLVMValueRef, ret_ref, of this instruction available everywhere in your program
Generate a store instruction to store the function parameter (use LLVMGetParam) into the memory location associated with (alloc instruction) the parameter name in the function ast node. 
Generate a return basic block and keep the LLVMBasicBlockRef, retBB, of this basic block available everywhere in your program
Set the position of the builder to the end of retBB
Add the following LLVM instructions to retBB:
A load instruction from the ret_ref.
A return instruction with operand as the load instruction created above.
Generate IR for the function body by calling genIRStmt subroutine given below: pass entryBB as a parameter to genIRStmt and let the exitBB be the return value of genIRStmt call.
Get the terminator instruction of exitBB basic block:
if the terminator is NULL (there is no return statement at the end of the function body)
Set the position of the builder to the end of exitBB.
Generate an unconditional branch to retBB.
Remove all basic blocks that do not have any predecessor basic blocks (think breadth-first search (BFS) !!!)
Time for memory cleanup (delete memory from maps, sets, builder)!
Subroutine genIRStmt:

Input: astNode of the statement, builder, LLVMBasicBlockRef startBB: This is the basic block where the subroutine starts adding LLVM IR instructions
Output: LLVMBasicBlockRef endBB: This is the basic block the subroutine uses to connect to the next AST statement if there is one

Algorithm:

If the statement is an assignment statement:
Set the position of the builder to the end of startBB
Generate LLVMValueRef of RHS by calling the genIRExpr subroutine given below.
Generate an LLVM store instruction to store the RHS LLVMValueRef to the memory location (alloc instruction) corresponding to the LHS.
return startBB (startBB is also the endBB in case of an assignment statement)
If the statement is a call statement (it must be a call to print function as per the grammar ):
Set the position of the builder to the end of startBB
Generate LLVMValueRef of the value being printed by calling the genIRExpr subroutine given below.
Generate a Call instruction to the print function and use LLVMValueRef as parameter to the call.
return startBB (startBB is also the endBB in case of an assignment statement)
If the statement is a while statement:
Set the position of the builder to the end of startBB.
Generate a basic block to check the condition of the while loop. Let this be condBB.
Generate an unconditional branch at the end of startBB to condBB.
Set the position of the builder to the end of condBB.
Generate LLVMValueRef of the relational expression (comparison) in the condition of the while loop by calling the genIRExpr subroutine given below.
Generate two basic blocks, trueBB and falseBB, that will be the successor basic blocks when condition is true or false respectively.
Generate a conditional branch at the end of condBB using the LLVMValueRef of comparison in step E above and setting the successor as trueBB when the condition is true and the successor as falseBB when the condition is false.
Generate the LLVM IR for the while loop body by calling the genIRStmt subroutine recursively: pass trueBB as a parameter to genIRStmt and let the trueExitBB be the return value of genIRStmt call.
Set the position of the builder to the end of trueExitBB.
Generate an unconditional branch to condBB at the end of trueExitBB.
Return falseBB as the endBB for a while statement.
If the statement is an if statement:
Set the position of the builder to the end of startBB.
Generate LLVMValueRef of the relational expression (comparison) in the condition of the if statement by calling the genIRExpr subroutine given below.
Generate two basic blocks, trueBB and falseBB, that will be the successor basic blocks when condition is true or false respectively.
Generate a conditional branch at the end of startBB using the LLVMValueRef of comparison in step B above, and setting the successor as trueBB when the condition is true and the successor as falseBB when the condition is false.
If there is no else part to the if statement
Generate the LLVM IR for the if body by calling the genIRStmt subroutine recursively: pass trueBB as a parameter to genIRStmt and let the ifExitBB be the return value of genIRStmt call.
Set the position of the builder to the end of ifExitBB.
Add an unconditional branch to falseBB.
Return falseBB as the endBB.
If there is an else part to the if statement:
Generate the LLVM IR for the if body by calling the genIRStmt subroutine recursively: pass trueBB as a parameter to genIRStmt and let the ifExitBB be the return value of genIRStmt call.
Generate the LLVM IR for the else body by calling the genIRStmt subroutine recursively: pass falseBB as a parameter to genIRStmt and let the elseExitBB be the return value of genIRStmt call.
Generate a new endBB basic block.
Set the position of the builder to the end of ifExitBB.
Add an unconditional branch to endBB.
Set the position of the builder to the end of elseExitBB.
Add an unconditional branch to endBB.
return endBB.
If the statement is a return statement: 
Set the position of the builder to the end of startBB.
Generate LLVMValueRef of the return value (could be an expression) by calling the genIRExpr subroutine given below.
Generate a store instruction from LLVMValueRef of return value to the memory location pointed by ret_ref alloc statement.
Generate an unconditional branch to retBB.
Generate a new endBB basic block and return it
If the statement is a block statement:
Set a variable prevBB to startBB
for each statement S in the statement list in the block statement:
Generate the LLVM IR for S by calling the genIRStmt subroutine recursively: pass prevBB as a parameter to genIRStmt and assign the return value of genIRStmt call to prevBB (this connects each statement to the next statement)
return the value returned by the call to genIRStmt on the last statement in the statement list as endBB.
 

Subroutine genIRExpr:

Input: astNode of the expression, builder reference (this allows the subroutine to add LLVM instructions in the correct basic block)

Output: LLVMValueRef of the expression

Algorithm:

If the node is a constant:
Generate an LLVMValueRef using LLVMConstInt using the constant value in the node.
Return the LLVMValueRef of the LLVM Constant.
If the node is a var:
Generate a load instruction that loads from the memory location (alloc instruction in var_map) corresponding to the variable name in the node.
Return the LLVMValueRef of the load instruction.
If the node is a unary expression:
Generate LLVMValueRef for the expr in the unary expression node by calling genIRExpr recursively.
Generate a subtraction instruction with constant 0 as the first operand and LLVMValueRef from step A above as the second operand.
Return the LLVMValueRef of the subtraction instruction.
If the node is a binary expression:
Generate LLVMValueRef for the lhs in the binary expression node by calling genIRExpr recursively.
Generate LLVMValueRef for the rhs in the binary expression node by calling genIRExpr recursively.
Based on the operator in the binary expression node, generate an addition/subtraction/multiplication instruction using LLVMValueRef of lhs and rhs as operands.
Return the LLVMValueRef of the instruction generated in step C.
If the node is a relational (comparison) expression:
Generate LLVMValueRef for the lhs in the binary expression node by calling genIRExpr recursively.
Generate LLVMValueRef for the rhs in the binary expression node by calling genIRExpr recursively.
Based on the operator in the relational expression node, generate a compare instruction with parameter LLVMIntPredicate Op set to a comparison operator from LLVMIntPredicate enum in Core.h file.  The comparison operator should correspond to op in the given ast node.
Return the LLVMValueRef of the instruction generated in step C.
If the node is a call (it must be a read function call as per the grammar):
Generate a call instruction to read function.
Return the LLVMValueRef of the call instruction



for tests find them in tests/builder_tests